Database Concepts CS60


Definitions
Pg. 17 Data Modeling explained
The challenge in design is the primary motivator for learning to work with data modeling skills that facilitates work by multiple parties and provides maintenance and meets business requirements, etc.
Pg. 20 Database design
The purpose of database design is to determine what data is to go into the database and how.

Structural Independence – the access to data in a database is unaffected by changes to internal structure.  E.g. adding a new column and then having applications still work with the new structure

Data Dependence/Independence – applies to data type, e.g. from decimal to integer (a nuance to the previous example maybe…)  Data independence is what exists when making changes to the data storage characteristics without affecting the application accessing/usability of it.

Problems with Databases
(1) Structural and/or Data Dependence
(2) Data anomalies...categorized by Update anomalies, Insertion anomalies, and Deletion anomalies.  
(3) Lack of design features or functions
(4)  Poor data management in design phase (this is known as Data Modeling)
Advantages of the Database Model (Environment)
DMBS Software – Not actually part of the O/S software, but is Application software, however it also ships with utilities to control the software, monitor, and perform basic tasks of the software like creating structures for database and providing end users with a Graphical interface.
SQL Language – the de facto programming language designed specifically as a non-procedural language that does hide the inner-workings of the programs power as an application and instead goes for ease of use and is a standard that could make up just part of the interaction with database, with the rest coming in the form of API’s written in other procedural languages probably (C, Java, VB, etc.)
Disadvantages of database (see slides or notes)
NOTE: Do chapter reviews in Ch1 through 4 before next Monday class
